# unPAD-study
Observational cohort study using the ESID online Registry.

INTRODUCTION TO THE FIELD
Patients with primary immunodeficiency (PID) suffer an intrinsic defect in their immune system that will manifest itself soon after birth or later in life with too many, too frequent, unusual and/or unusually severe infections. Also, other symptoms of failing immune function such as autoimmunity or lymphoproliferation may be present, or even prevail. PIDs are rare disorders, therefore, international collaboration is necessary to study these diseases. Since 2004, the European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) has been running the ESID online Registry. The data are stored on secure servers in Freiburg, Germany. Data transfer is SSL encrypted. Recently, this Registry has been evaluated and improved. Clinical working definitions of PID entities are now used to define disease categories within the Registry to allow registration of patients in a standardized fashion. These criteria have been developed by the members of the Registry Steering Committee as well as a large team of external experts. For all patients, basic characteristics are being registered at first registration and yearly thereafter in the so-called level 1 forms. Detailed characteristics of the patients can be registered in level 2 forms, but this is not mandatory. Preformulated research questions underlie the questions in the forms. For specific studies, temporary level 3 forms can be added to specific disease categories.
More than 200 forms of PID have been described to date. Severe forms of PID such as severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) lead to severe morbidity and early mortality if they are not recognized in time, and treated in specialized centres. These forms are very rare (1:100,000-200,000). Milder forms of PID are generally not immediately life threatening, but lead to important morbidity, irreversible organ damage and ultimate loss of lifespan when they are not recognized and properly treated. These milder forms mainly comprise diseases with predominantly antibody deficiency. Well-described monogenetic forms of antibody deficiency such as X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) or hyper-IgM syndromes (HIGMs) are the most severe types; they are also rare (1:100,000-500,000). It is estimated that some 1.5 million people suffer some form of PID within the European Union (EU), of these, only some 60,000 suffer such a severe form that it leads to significant problems very early in life. That means most PID patients suffer a form that is less severe and presents later.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most common form seen in specialised centres (estimated prevalence 1:10,000-50,000). CVID is strictly defined in the ESID Registry.
However, many more patients suffer from less-well described and understood forms of ‘hypogammaglobulinaemia’: deficiency of IgG, IgG-subclass(es), IgM, IgA and/or specific antibody, alone, or in combination(s). These patients often are not recognised and do not visit physicians in specialised/tertiary centres, are mostly not characterised very well immunologically, and are often not treated with the immunodeficiency taken into consideration. Besides, it is not very well known whether and if so how they should be treated, nor whether treatment(s) are useful for some but not all subgroups. For these patients, several working definitions have been defined separately in the ESID online Registry. For this project, the combined patients registered under those working definitions are referred to as ‘unPAD patients’.

STUDY OBJECTIVES
The primary objective of the unPAD study is to characterise ‘unPAD patients’. To this end, a set of research questions were formulated by the antibody deficiency expert panel of the ESID Registry Working Party: I. What is the clinical presentation of these patients with unPAD at diagnosis (spectrum, observed prevalence; subgroups, age-related differences)? II. What is the immunological presentation of these patients at diagnosis? III. Can subgroups be identified at diagnosis based on clinical and/or immunological characteristics? IV. What is the clinical presentation of these patients during follow-up (spectrum, observed prevalence; subgroups, age-related differences)?V. What is the immunological presentation of these patients during follow-up? VI. Can subgroups be identified based on clinical and/or immunological characteristics; if so, is this a stationary classification, or do patients develop from one subgroup to another / others with time? VII. What is the prognosis of (subgroups of) these patients with regard to infections, complications, long-term sequelae, life expectancy, quality of life and ability to function in society?

STUDY DESIGN
The unPAD study is a multi-centre observational cohort study based on ESID online Registry data. All the available data will be monitored and – if necessary – corrected. The unPAD study will be run as long as the investigators expect additional information can be gained from another round of analyses (which will by nature mean a longer follow-up period than in the analyses performed before). 
